We look at the codecs that are used,
mostly, in the wireless networks.
These are all based on LPC principles.
In the 2G networks,
GSM enhanced full rate EFR,
or the CDMA they typically had
12 to 13 kilobits per second and
the voice quality is fairly
close to the quality.
As the computation
capabilities of the DSP chips
used in cellphones became
much more capable.
It became possible to use very,
very complex algorithms
to reduce the bitrate further and
also improve the quality.
The main concept is CELP,
code excited linear prediction.
This is the work horse of AMR, EVRC and
a whole bunch of other codecs.
As we saw before,
we are dealing with the innovation, or
the ignorance,
that is not captured by the model.
That's really the name of the game.
So what we missed in the model,
if we get to represent it much better,
we will have much better quality or
much lower bitrate.
So, this block diagram is
the CELP-based predictors.
The block 1/A(z) is the LPC Filter
that we have seen before.
So, we use e(n), the difference
between the predictive signal and
the input signal to pass it through
a perceptually weighted filter.
So, this filter tries to put
more quantization noise under,
let's say, the formants, as the ear
will not perceive as much noise as it
gets masked by the strong
formants in that spectral region.
So, as you can appreciate,
the impulse trains at the pitch
locations and
the random noise that we saw in the LPC
formulation is a very,
very rigid structure.
So, to overcome that, we have a codebook
that has a very rich variety of
excitation signals that we can
use to excite the vocal tract.
We also have this pitch prediction filter,
which is also called
the logdone predictor,
represented by 1/P(z).
The main idea here is we
have an embedded synthesis
structure similar to what
happens at the receiver.
We saw an idea similar to
this in the ADPCM where
the decoder is embedded in the encoder.
So, this is called analysis by synthesis.
We search the codebook using
analysis by synthesis method to find
the best code word X(k)
that minimizes the error.
So, there area lot of
variations on this scheme and
that's why there are so
many different versions of codecs for
different networks with different
error resolution properties.
It is beyond the scope of this lecture
to cover CELP codecs exhaustively,
but I really would like to
give you some kind of a feel,
a flavor of how this actually works.
So, here is the same signal
that we have seen before.
And I have this region of
highlighted the cursor that
corresponds to the sound
[SOUND] in the word ask.
So, the carrier sentence is, don't ask
me to carry an oily rag like that.
So, you can see the formants that would be
captured by the filter A(z) in the colored
lines that you see on the spectrogram.
So, here is the spectrum of
that particular segment that
you were seeing before.
The peaks that you see
here very frequently,
these are actually the pitch pulses.
These are what are captured
by the pitch predictor or
long term predictor P(z) that
we saw in the CELP plot diagram.
And the formulation is pretty much
similar to what we use to compute for
the filter A(z), that's the linear filter,
the short term predictor.
The remaining signal after
what P(z) has captured is
the LPC smoothed spectrum that
the A(z) would actually be capturing.
So, you can see the nice
formant structure,
this is the slow varying
filter that the LPC filters,
AI or A(z),
capture once every 20 milliseconds.
So, if you look at the segment
right next to the r
in the spectrogram in the word ask
that corresponds to the sound [SOUND].
You do not see the periodicity of
the pitch pulses, as you can see here.
There is also more energy in the high
frequencies, compared to low frequencies.
This is the region between 0.43 and
0.49 seconds in this
spectrogram waveform that you can
see a couple of slides before.
So, the pitch predictor that we are using
would fail to find any periodicity here.
So, we would classify this
as an invoiced segment and
this is the LPC smoothed
spectrum of this own as.
Even though the peaks are not formants,
you can clearly see that the high order
filter that we are using does capture
the smooth spectrum of the vocal track.